#01—Poder Tortuga

__Introducción:__
Este trimestre vamos a aprender un lenguaje de programación llamado Python.  La persona que creó Python lo llamó en honor de su programa de televisión favorito: El Circo Ambulante de los Monty Python. Pythn es usado por un montón de programadores para cosas muy diferenes. Python es un lenguaje muy poderos e inteligente que se utiliza en YouTube, la NASA, el CERN y muchos otros sitios. Si tu club tiene una Raspberry Pi, puedes usar Python para programarla. Muha gente adora Python por que es fácil de leer (al menos comparado a otros lenguajes de programación). Poder leer código es una habiliad muy importante, tan importante como poder escribirlo.


##Paso 0: Abrir el Editor de Python

Si ya tienes Python en tu ordenador, es hora de empezar.

- En Windows, busca IDLE en el menu Inicio.
- En Mac OS X, abre la Terminal.app y escribe "idle" y dale a la tecla enter.
- En Linux, abre una consola o Terminal, y escribe "idle" y dale a la tecla enter.

Si no tienes Python instalado, no pasa nada! Puedes descargar la última version de Python desde [http://www.python.org/](http://www.python.org/getit/). La versión exacta no importa mucho, pero nosotros vamos a usar la versión 3, así que debería empezas por 3  (no 2).

Cuand IDLE empieza verás una ventana de salida llamada "Python Shell". Necesitamos abrir una nueva ventana paa escribir código dentro. Ves a "Archivo -> Nueva Ventana" y ya estarás listo para el Paso 1. Asegúrate que ambas ventanas están visibles.

##Paso 1: Hola, Mundo!

1. Abre IDLE, el editor que viene con Python. Todo nuestro código se escribirá en este editor. Cuando lo abras, verás una ventana donde aparecerán errores y resultados.

2. En caso que no lo hayas hecho ya, elige "Archivo -> Nueva Ventana". Una ventana vacía aparecerá, con el título de An empty window will appear, with '*Sin Título*' en la barra de título.
    Ahora deberías tener dos ventanas abiertas, una para escribir el programa y otra para mostrar el resultado. Asegúrate de escribir en la ventana correcta!

3. Escribe el siguiente cigo en la nueva ventana:

    ```python
    print("Hola, Mundo!")
    ```
4. Asegúrate que no estas en la ventana de la Shell de Python, y guarda tu código.

Lo puedes hacer eligiendo Archivo -> Guardar. Cuando te pidan un nombre de archivo, escribe hello.py, y guarda el archivo en tu escritorio. Luego elije Ejecutar -> Ejecutar Módulo.

Felicidades, has escrito tu primer programa de Python :) (PD: Puedes hacer que imprima cualquier cosa que quieras, ¿por qué no lo cambias para que te diga hola a ti? Cámbialo para que diga tu nombre)


__Súper Pista__:
* En __Windows__ y en __Ubuntu__, utiliza Ctrl-N para crear una nueva ventana en tu terminal, utiliza ctrl-S para guardar tu archivo una vez hayas terminado de editarlo, y pulsa F5 para ejecutar tu programa. En algunos ordenadores a lo mejor has de pulsar también la tecla de función Fn.
* En __Mac OS X__, pulsa cmd-N para crear una nueva ventana en tu terminal, utiliza ctrl-S para guardar tu archivo y pulsa la tecla función (fn) y la tecla F5 a la vez para ejecutar tu programa.


##Paso 2: Hola, Tortuga!

Lo siguiente que vamos a hacer es divertirnos un poco con las tortugas. Una tortuga es un robot muy chiquitito que dibuja en tu pantalla. Podemos hacer que se mueva usando comandos de Python.

1. Abre una nueva ventana en tu terminal (Desde el menú Archivo) y escribe lo siguiente:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    forward(100)

    ```
2. Guarda tu programa como  mitortuga.py y elije la opción Ejecutar -> Ejecutar Móduleo. ¿Ves cómo la tortuga se mueve 100 píxeles hacia adelante? La tortuga tiene pegado un lápiz y dibuja líneas al moverse alrededor de la pantalla.

    __Súper Pista:__ Los archivos de programas Python siempre deberías darle un nombre que acaben en '.py'.

3. Vamos a hacer que la tortuga se mueva por la pantalla! Puedes usar `backward(distancia)` para que la tortuga vaya havia atrás, para que gire puedes usar `right(ángulo)` y `left(ángulo)`. Por ejemplo `backward(20)` le dice a la tortuga que se mueva acia atrás 20 píxeles, y `right(90)` le dice  la tortuga que gire hacia la derecha 90 grados. Si le das más de una instrucción, éstas se ejecutarán en orden.

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    forward(100)
    right(120)
    forward(100)
    left(90)
    backward(100)
    left(90)
    forward(50)

    ```

### Ángulos y Grados

Juega un poto dibujando tus propias formas utilizando las instrucciones `forward` (adelante), `backward` (atrás), `left` (iquierda), `right` (derecha). Recuerda, con `forward` y `backward` haces que la tortuga se se desplace un número de pixeles, pero con `left` y `right` giras los ángulos. Vamos a ver cómo una tortuga gira a la derecha.

```
        Norte
          0
          |
Oeste     |     Este
 270 -----+----- 90
          |
          |
         180
        Sur
```

When the turtle is facing North, turning right 90 degrees, makes it face East, turning 180 degrees makes it face south, and turning 270 degrees makes it face West. If you turn 360 degrees, you end up where you started.

What about turning left?

```
        Norte
          0
          |
Oeste     |     Este
  90 -----+----- 270
          |
          |
         180
        Sur
```

Cuando la tortuga está mirando hacia elNorte, girar 90 grados a la izquierda hace que se ponga mirenado al Oeste. Girando 180 hace que se ponga mirando al Sur y girando 270 grados hace que se ponga mirando al Este. Si giras la tortuga 360 grados, acabarás en la misma posición que habías empezado. Una vuelta completa son 360 grados.


###What does the code at the beginning of our program do

* `from turtle import *` tells Python we want to use the turtle library, a collection of code we can use to draw on the screen. Using a library means we can save time.

* `speed()` sets the speed of the turtle, it takes a value between 1 and 11. 11 is the fastest, 1 is the slowest.
* `shape()` We are using the "turtle" shape, but it can also take the values "arrow", "circle", "square", "triangle" or "classic".

We will be putting these three instructions at the top of all our programs in this lesson. If you like you can make your turtle a different shape, or go as fast or slow as you want.

##Step 3: Drawing Shapes!

Lets make a square by telling the turtle how to move around.

1. Open up a new file in IDLE, and write the following code in:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    forward(100)
    right(90)
    forward(100)
    right(90)
    forward(100)
    right(90)
    forward(100)
    right(90)
    ```

    Save your program and choose run -> new module. Do you see a square?. The turtle turns 90 degrees four times, and ends up facing back in the same direction as it started. Turning 90, 90, 90 and 90 again, turns the turtle 360 degrees in total.

    What about a triangle? A triangle has three corners, so we need to turn three times. If we want to end up back in the same direction, we will need to turn a total of 360, like the square. So we will turn 120 degrees, then 120 degrees, and once more.

2. Edit your code to look like the following, to draw a triangle instead:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    forward(100)
    right(120)
    forward(100)
    right(120)
    forward(100)
    right(120)
    ```

3. Run your code. Do you have a triangle?

### Pick a Colour

What's your favourite colour? You can change the colour of the lines using the function `pencolor` (Python uses American spellings), and you can also change the pen size using `pensize`:

1. Edit the code from before to look like the next example, by adding in these new commands:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    pensize(10)
    pencolor("red")
    forward(100)
    right(120)
    pencolor("blue")
    forward(100)
    right(120)
    pencolor("green")
    forward(100)
    right(120)
    ```

2. Run your code, what does it draw on screen?
    This code draws a thick triangle in three different colors.

3. Try changing the colors in your code, run it, and see what happens.
    The turtle knows hundreds of different colours, not just red, blue and green, try using your favourite colour!
    You can also specify colours in __hex__ like we did in CSS. Instead of using `pencolor("red")` you could use hex `pencolor("#FF0000")`.
    What colour is #FF4F00?


##Step 4: Repeating Yourself (with a for loop)

That last program was the same commands over and over again. Instead of writing them down, let's ask the computer to repeat them for us.  You should have encountered *iteration* in Scratch before using the `Forever` and `Repeat`/`Repeat until` blocks. In Python __for loops__ are used when you have a piece of code which you want to repeat n number of times. In this case we want to repeat the code (that is indented) 4 times (because a square has 4 sides).

1. Open up a new file and type the following in:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    for count in range(4):
        forward(100)
        right(90)

    ```
2. Save your program and choose: Run -> Run module.

    Notice the program is *indented*, or pushed to the left under the for loop. Python uses spaces to know which commands to repeat. You can use the Tab key in IDLE to add indents, and use Shift-Tab to remove some.

3. Let's see what happens when we only indent `forward`, and edit your program to look like this one:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    for count in range(4):
        forward(100)
    right(90)
    ```

4. Notice how `forward` is indented and `right` isn't? What do you think this program does? Try running it to find out?

    Did you get a straight line? Python will repeat `forward` four times, and *then* turn right. Python uses spaces to group commands together, like scratch uses blocks. Python will complain if the code isn't properly lined up.

5. Let's change it back to the earlier program, and get it to run a square, but instead of using numbers in the code, we can assign names. This makes it easier to see what the program is doing, and also helps us to stop repeating ourselves.

    Edit the file to look like this:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    sides = 4
    length = 100
    angle = 90
    for count in range(sides):
        forward(length)
        right(angle)
    ```

6. Save your program and choose: Run -> Run module.

### Challenge: Drawing the other shapes

Can you draw the following shapes by changing the values?

* a triangle? (three sides)
* a pentagon? (five sides)
* a hexagon? (six sides)
* an octagon? (eight sides)

Remember, a Triangle has three sides, and turns 120 degrees. Turning 120 degrees for each corner means we turn 360 degrees in total. For a Square, we turn 90 degrees for four corners, which also adds up to 360 degrees.

If you are turning six times, how much should you turn so it adds up to 360? Try out numbers and see what shapes you get.

##Step 5: Turn, Turn, Turn

Instead of us working out the angle, why don't we let the computer do it for us. Python can let you do some operations on numbers, like addition, subtraction, multiplication and division.

We could write `sides = 4 + 1` instead of 5, or `sides = 4 - 1` instead of 3. For multiplication, Python uses `*`, and for division, we write `/`.

If we need to turn 360 degrees in total, we can work out the angle we'll need. For a square, `360 / 4` is 90, for a Triangle, `360/3` is 120.

1. Change your program to calculate the angle as following.

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    sides = 4
    length = 20

    angle = 360/sides
    for count in range(sides):
        forward(length)
        right(angle)
    ```

2. Now change the number of sides, does Python get it right? Try drawing a hexagon (6 sides), or any number of sides you want!

##Step 6: Solid Shape

1. We can ask the turtle to fill in shapes with a colour, by using `begin_fill()` and `end_fill()`. Change your code to
add these commands in:


    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    sides = 4
    length = 20

    fillcolor('red')
    pencolor('red')
    begin_fill()

    angle = 360/sides
    for count in range(sides):
        forward(length)
        right(angle)
    end_fill()
    ```

    Like with `pencolor`, `fillcolor` sets the color the turtle uses to fill in the shapes you draw. This draws a red square with a red outline.

    You use `begin_fill()` to tell the turtle you're drawing a shape to colour-in, and `end_fill()` to say you've finished it.
2. Try changing the colours, sides and lengths to see what shapes you can draw!

##Step 7: Pen Goes Up, Pen Goes Down

If you want to move the turtle without leaving a trail behind it, you can use `penup()` and `pendown()` to turn drawing on and off.

1. In a new file, try the following:

    ```python
    from turtle import *

    speed(11)
    shape("turtle")

    pencolor('red')

    for count in range(20):
        penup()
        forward(10)
        pendown()
        forward(20)
    ```

2. This should draw a dashed line across your screen. Run it and see!

### Home, home on the screen.

One last little trick. `home()` returns the turtle to the starting position. `clear()` wipes the screen clean, and `reset()` moves the turtle and clears the screen.

## Step 8: Go Wild!

You can go `forward()`, `backward()`, `left()`, `right()`, you can loop using `for count in range(4)`, change colours, change speed and even fill in shapes!

Can you draw a house, a bird? a snake? a cat? a dog? a lion? Combine the shapes together and see what you can draw. Can you draw a robot?
